doc/md: flux cd guide (#2092)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/guides/deploying/k8s-flux.md

---
id: k8s-flux
title: Deploying to Kubernetes with the Atlas Operator and Flux CD
slug: /guides/deploying/k8s-flux
---

[GitOps](https://www.gitops.tech/) is a software development and deployment methodology that uses Git as the central repository
for both code and infrastructure configurations, enabling automated and auditable deployments.

[FluxCD](https://fluxcd.io/) is a Continuous Delivery tool that implements GitOps principles. It uses a declarative approach

> to keep Kubernetes clusters in sync with sources of configuration (like Git repositories), and automating 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to keep Kubernetes clusters in sync with sources of configuration (like Git repositories), and automates 
```

> updates to configuration when there is new code to deploy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration updates when there is new code to deploy.
```

[Kubernetes Operators](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/) are software extensions to Kubernetes that enable the automation and management 
of complex, application-specific operational tasks and domain-specific knowledge within a Kubernetes cluster.

In this guide, we will demonstrate how to use the [Atlas Kubernetes Operator](/integrations/kubernetes/operator) and Flux CD to achieve a 
GitOps-based deployment workflow for your database schema.

> ## Pre-requisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites
```

On a high level, our application consists of the following components:

1. A backend application - in our example we will use a plain NGINX server
   as a placeholder for a real backend application.
2.  A database - in our example we will use a MySQL pod for the database. In a more realistic scenario,
    you might want to use a managed database service like AWS RDS or GCP Cloud SQL.
3. An `AtlasSchema`  Custom Resource that defines the database schema and is managed by the Atlas Operator.

In our application architecture, we have a database that is connected to our application and managed 
using Atlas CR (Custom Resource). The database plays a crucial role in storing and retrieving
data for the application, while the Atlas CR provides seamless integration and management of the 
database schema within our Kubernetes environment.

## Incorporating schema changes into a GitOps flow 

### Databases should be migrated before the application is deployed

Integrating GitOps practices with a database in our application stack poses a unique challenge. 

Flux CD provides a declarative approach to GitOps, allowing us to define a Flux CD application and

> seamlessly handle the synchronization process. By pushing changes to the database schema or application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
effortlessly handle the synchronization process. When pushing changes to the database schema or application
```

code to the Git repository, Flux CD automatically syncs those changes to the Kubernetes cluster.

However, as we discussed in the introduction, ensuring the proper order of deployments is critical. 

> In our scenario, the database deployment must succeed before rolling out the application to ensure its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our scenario, the database deployment must succeed before rolling out the application to guarantee its
```

functionality. If the database deployment encounters an issue, it is essential to address it before
proceeding with the application deployment. 

### Flux CD Dependencies 101

Flux CD supports [Dependencies](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/kustomize/kustomizations/#dependencies),

> via `.spec.dependsOn`, a mechanism to orchestrate multiple deployments in a specific ordered sequence to ensure certain resources 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
via `.spec.dependsOn`, a mechanism used to orchestrate multiple deployments in a specific ordered sequence to ensure certain resources 
```

are healthy before subsequent resources are synced/reconciled.

By using `.spec.dependsOn`, you can define the apply order and thus determine the sequence of manifest
applications. `.spec.dependsOn` is used to refer to other Kustomization objects that the Kustomization 
depends on. If specified, then the Kustomization is only applied after the referred Kustomizations 
are ready, i.e. have the `Ready` condition marked as `True`. The readiness state of a Kustomization
is determined by its last applied status condition.

> For example, assuming we have a scenario where our application is comprised of two services, a `backend` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, let's assume we have a scenario where our application is comprised of two services, a `backend` 
```

service and a `database` service. The `backend` service depends on the `database` service, and we want
to ensure that the `database` service is ready before the `backend` service is applied. We can codify this
dependency in the following way:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: kustomize.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1
kind: Kustomization
metadata:
  name: database
  namespace: flux-system
spec:
  interval: 5m
  path: "./kustomize"
  prune: true
  sourceRef:
  kind: GitRepository
  name: flux-system
  // highlight-start
  healthChecks:
  - apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    name: mysql
    namespace: default
  // highlight-end
---
apiVersion: kustomize.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1
kind: Kustomization
metadata:
  name: backend
  namespace: flux-system
spec:
  // highlight-start
  dependsOn:
  - name: mysql
  // highlight-end
  interval: 5m
  path: "./kustomize"
  prune: true
  sourceRef:
  kind: GitRepository
  name: flux-system
```

> `.spec.healthChecks` in this manifest is used to refer to resources for which the Flux

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this manifest, `.spec.healthChecks` is used to refer to resources for which the Flux
```

8. Click `Generate token`.
9. Copy the new token to your clipboard.

### 4. Export your GitHub Credentials

Export your GitHub personal access token and username:

```bash
export GITHUB_TOKEN=<your-token>
export GITHUB_USER=<your-username>
```

### 5. Install Flux onto your Kubernetes Cluster

Run the bootstrap command:

```bash
flux bootstrap github \
  --owner=$GITHUB_USER \
  --repository=flux-infrastructure \
  --branch=main \
  --path=./clusters/dev \
  --personal
```

You will be prompted to enter your GitHub personal access token. The output is similar to:

```bash
► connecting to github.com
✔ repository created
✔ repository cloned
✚ generating manifests
✔ components manifests pushed
► installing components in flux-system namespace
deployment "source-controller" successfully rolled out
deployment "kustomize-controller" successfully rolled out
deployment "helm-controller" successfully rolled out
deployment "notification-controller" successfully rolled out
✔ install completed
► configuring deploy key
✔ deploy key configured
► generating sync manifests
✔ sync manifests pushed
► applying sync manifests
◎ waiting for cluster sync
✔ bootstrap finished
```

> Using the flux bootstrap command you can install Flux on a Kubernetes cluster and configure it to manage itself 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the flux bootstrap command, you can install Flux on a Kubernetes cluster and configure it to manage itself 
```

```

This command allows you to fetch and observe the status of `Kustomize` resources managed by Flux in your
Kubernetes cluster, with real-time updates as changes are made.

To check whether the schema migrations have been successfully applied, run:

```bash
kubectl exec -it $(kubectl get pods -l app=mysql -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}') -- mysql -uroot -ppass -e "describe example.users"
```

Our schema migrations have been successfully applied:

```text
+-----------+--------------+------+-----+---------+----------------+
| Field     | Type         | Null | Key | Default | Extra          |
+-----------+--------------+------+-----+---------+----------------+
| id        | int          | NO   | PRI | NULL    | auto_increment |
| name      | varchar(255) | NO   |     | NULL    |                |
| email     | varchar(255) | NO   | UNI | NULL    |                |
| short_bio | varchar(255) | NO   |     | NULL    |                |
+-----------+--------------+------+-----+---------+----------------+
```

### Make a change to the Application Database Schema

To show how the continuous deployment flow works, let's make a change to the database schema.

> Open the `kustomize/schema.yaml` file and add the a column to the `users` table in the `AtlasSchema` manifest:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the `kustomize/schema.yaml` file and add a column to the `users` table in the `AtlasSchema` manifest:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: db.atlasgo.io/v1alpha1
kind: AtlasSchema
metadata:
  name: app-schema
spec:
  url: mysql://root:pass@mysql:3306/example
  schema:
    sql: |
      create table users (
        id int not null auto_increment,
        name varchar(255) not null,
        email varchar(255) unique not null,
        short_bio varchar(255) not null,
        // highlight-next-line
        new_col varchar(255) not null,
        primary key (id)
      );
```

Commit and push the change to the repository:

```bash
git add kustomize/schema.yaml
git commit -m "Add new column to users table"
git push
```

> Next, let's wait for Flux to sync the changes, and check our schema migrations have been successfully applied:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, let's wait for Flux to sync the changes, and check that our schema migrations have been successfully applied:
```

```text
+-----------+--------------+------+-----+---------+----------------+
| Field     | Type         | Null | Key | Default | Extra          |
+-----------+--------------+------+-----+---------+----------------+
| id        | int          | NO   | PRI | NULL    | auto_increment |
| name      | varchar(255) | NO   |     | NULL    |                |
| email     | varchar(255) | NO   | UNI | NULL    |                |
// highlight-next-line
| short_bio | varchar(255) | NO   |     | NULL    |                |
| new_col   | varchar(255) | NO   |     | NULL    |                |
+-----------+--------------+------+-----+---------+----------------+
```
Amazing, our schema migrations have been successfully applied!

## Conclusion

In this guide, we demonstrated how to use Flux CD to deploy an application that uses the

> Atlas Operator to manage the lifecycle of the database schema. We also showed how to use Flux

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Atlas Operator to manage the lifecycle of a database schema. We also showed how to use Flux
```
